#summary The three-pronged arrow of times.
#labels Featured,changes

== What's New in Version Four (r212) ==

=== 4.669 (unreleased) ===
  * We renamed `cumm_mag_phase` and `diff_vectors` to `cumm_energy` and `inst_energy` to reflect their actual use.
    * Both have been fully vectorized for small performance gains.
  * We removed stop detection due to its being obsolete.
  * We buffered `disp_shifts`, which should produce noticeable performance gains. It used to be an I/O bottleneck.
  * We now compute `inst_energy` with actual vector subtraction rather than converting between phase-magnitude and complex numbers.
  * `quasiforce` plots the wait times of a sequence. Don't ask me why.
  * `Config.dire` controls quick-exit probability calculations. It's useful in speeding up things one-hundred fold in `sensitivity` and `quasiforce`.

=== 4.66 (r524) ===
  * God 2.0: It's our new genetic algorithm that attempts to find the best TAV matrix given a yield criteria. In our case, we used it to find the optimal TAV values in an attempt to calibrate them according to bovine growth hormone biological data.
  * Performance increases across the board as we vectorize GSPtools.
  * Config.detect_stops and Config.detect_pauses controls the detection of stop codons and long wait times.
  * sensitivity.m creates sensitivity plots, mainly used for Weiss genes.
  * Travel2.mat replaces the old Travel.mat if you want the new values outputted from God 2.0.

=== 4.6 (r325) ===
  * [BecomingHarsher The harsher yield model] is now gone, but in its place comes [Deviation]. You can switch back to probability via `config.m`.
  * Extensive documentation for the `Kidnap` module (Issue 3)
  * Optional arguments for `megaunity` and `unity` (Issue 1); for usage, see in-file documentation.
  * Model now detects stop codons and unusually long wait times (`displacement.m`) that we call ribosomal hyperpauses for short
  * `alopeciaunity.m` saves polar plots in batches, similar to what `opportunity.m` and `jejunity.m` do for overlay and error bar plots
    * `impunity.m` handles single files in addition to folders now. Try it out with `impunity('prfb.txt', {'uga,25'}, {}, 100)`.
  * Performance increases in `cumm_mag_phase.m` and Kidnap

=== 4 ===
  * reloop and sofar gone, q.v. BecomingHarsher
  * The ThrushBaby algorithm

  * free2bind, refactored to Kidnap, heavily edited (from 9000 lines to 400)
   * Now extensible with other parameter modules and readable
   * !SantaLucia module depreciated due to lack of key subroutines
   * free2bind.zip no longer a requirement for installation
  * Performance increase in `diff_vectors.m`

== What's New in Version Three ==

=== 3.141 (r156) ===
  * `Travel.mat` memoizes `nloopcalc.m` and combines `TAV.mat` and `Codons.mat`, making it redundant. Huge performance increases resulted because `nloopcalc` was called so many times.
  * `dysentery.pl --rcheck`

=== 3.14 ===
  * Back frameshifts are now detected. Every function that took a forward frameshift parameter now takes a back frameshift parameter as well.
  * `dysentery.pl` will convert amino acid primary structure sequences to codon sequences, randomly choosing codons. In addition, it verifies hand-customized codon sequences against a primary structure sequence.
  * Sine and cosine in calculating window function now bounded for more accurate results.
  * `jejunity.m` plots the average path taken by the codon in addition to error bars. It takes the same commands as `opportunity.m`, both displaying the same information about deviation.

=== 3.1 ===
  * `opportunity.m`: Spits out superimposed displacement plots for rainy day family slideshows
  * `impunity.m`: Puts the yields for all sequences in a folder into a `results.txt` file
  * `unity.m` and `megaunity.m` and `cornerstone.pl` now web-enabled
  * `fabio.pl` (web-enabled): Parses TAV frequencies and spits them back out in the order of `Codons.mat`, i.e. spits out new `TAV.mat` for new species

=== 3 ===
  * Unused functions deleted but available from [http://theframeshiftkids.googlecode.com/svn/tags/2+some/GSPtools/ the archives]
  * `fcalcmpx` split up and `megaunity` now several times faster
  * new `cornerstone.pl` parses Genbank search results and
  * no more fudging with free2bind (Thanks, Scott!)

== Why Version 1.1 ==
We re-released with Lalit's deterministic model merged other changes we've made since 3.1, merely replacing 3.1's `displacement.m`. Therefore it's web-enabled and has 3.1's Perl tools and performance.
